\clearpage % Rozdzia≈Çy zaczynamy od nowej strony.

\section{Summary}

The goal of this work was to run PenPoint OS on a modern computer with
reasonable performance, and be able to use it with the help of a mouse,
a graphics tablet or a touchscreen. PenPoint was an important and influential
albeit now mostly forgotten piece of computing history. It is important to
preserve it and at the same time maybe gain a little insight.

The first approach consisted of trying to port modifications of the JPC
emulator created by professor Simon Schubiger to the QEMU hypervisor. The JPC
emulator was not performant enough to run PenPoint OS at a speed that would be
comfortable to use. First the changes to the JPC emulator required to run
PenPoint were discussed in detail: what they do, how they do it, and how all of
this relates to the general architecture of the JPC. Then the operation of the
QEMU hypervisor, the process of defining a new device in the QEMU source tree
and making it available to QEMU, and the reasoning behind choosing QEMU were
described in depth. This approach however was abandoned because of the
complexity and because an easier way became available.

\begin{figure}[!h]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{penpoint-pc-tablet.png}
    \caption{PenPoint OS running on PC with a graphics tablet}
    \label{fig:penpoint-pc-tablet}
\end{figure}

In the second approach a different distribution of PenPoint OS was used, one
that was created so that it could be installed on a PC running MS-DOS. Here the
process of obtaining the installation files, the installation, and
configuration of the DOS environment created using FreeDOS, and of PenPoint is
described. First it was described how the SDK distribution of PenPoint differs
from the version created for the NCR 3125. Then it was shown how the floppy
disk files ought to be prepared to be used with a virtual machine, and the
process of installation was explained. Finally it was demonstrated how to
configure the FreeDOS environment to run PenPoint OS and how to configure
PenPoint OS itself to work with a mouse. The difference between a relative and
absolute pointing device was discussed as well, how it works in both QEMU and
VirtualBox, and what was tried and what should be done in QEMU to support an
absolute pointing device like a graphics tablet.

